Hello everyone in this lesson we will learn about user accounts in wordpress to be more specific.
Here's what we're going to cover.
First we will learn how to change your author name that gets displayed on the front end of your website.
After that we will learn how to add or customize your avatar profile photo so that way depending on
your theme you can have a little photo of yourself appear next to all of your posts.
After that we will learn how to create new additional accounts for your friends or coworkers.
So that way your website can have multiple authors.
And finally we will work to understand the different user roles that are available in wordpress.
Right because maybe we do want to invite a friend or coworker to help contribute to our Web site but
we don't want that person to have full administrative access to customize anything and everything on
our website.
Without further ado let's start with our first goal which is to learn how to change the author name
that gets displayed on our posts.
So for example here's the home page of my website and if I navigate to the recipes category archive
and then if I click on any of these posts so Greek salad or homemade french bread.
Once I click on one of them I'm taken to the detail screen for just that one single post.
And here we can see my profile Avatar photo.
And more importantly my name now at the moment it reads kiddo admin which is my username so you can
imagine that we don't want to share the visitors of our website our user name here.
It would make much more sense to show them our real name.
So let me show you how to customize this.
If we jump into the admin dashboard and then in the left hand side bar look for users OK and then on
this screen we will see a list of all registered users within our website.
Now obviously at the moment we just have the one my main admin account.
So go ahead and click on it.
And from this screen I want to draw your attention to this name Area.
All right.
So you can see that the user name field is grayed out because we cannot change that.
That's the username that you chose at the very beginning of this course.
And once you choose that it's really set in stone.
However we can input a first name a last name and a nickname.
So let's try this out for first name.
I will say Kitty because I'm pretending that my cat is the author of this Web site for last name I will
say hello kitty Doh.
And for nickname I will say Kitty the cat.
Ok and now that we've entered content for these three fields here's the important part.
Now down here within this display name publicly as within this field now we can choose how we want to
display our name on the front end of our Web site so we can choose our username.
Our first name our last name our first and last name combined our last name first and then our first
name or our nickname.
So feel free to choose whatever you like.
I'm going to choose my nickname.
Kitty the cat.
Ok then just scroll down to the very bottom of this page and click the blue update profile button.
Ok and now that we've made that change if I jumped back to the homemade french bread blog post or any
post for that matter.
Perfect.
Now we can see the my author name gets displayed as Kitty the cat.
OK so we've completed our first goal.
Now let's change gears and learn how to customize our avatar profile photo.
So if I zoom in a bit you can see that currently my profile photo is a cat and you might be wondering
how you can add an Avatar like that to your account.
I do want to stress the point that every theme is different and I'm using the 2016 theme which chooses
to show my avatar and my author name.
But depending on the theme that you're using it might be placed in a different location or it might
not be used at all.
But if you're using a theme that supports avatars.
Let me show you how to add one.
All you need to do is perform a Google search for Gravatar.
Here is the official Gravatar Web site.
It's Gravatar dot com.
And from this Web site you can create a free Gravatar account.
So just like you would create a free account with services like Twitter or Facebook or Pinterest you
create an account with the Gravatar service now creating and setting up your Gravatar account is very
simple very intuitive.
So we don't need to walk through it together.
But I do want to stress one key point.
When you sign up for your Gravatar account be sure that you use the same e-mail address that you used
for your Wordpress administrator account.
What I mean by that is if I jump back to my wordpress admin dashboard and in the sidebar if I click
on users.
So at the moment you probably just have the one admin account of yours.
So whatever e-mail address you used for that account be sure you use that same e-mail address when you
create your Gravatar account as long as that e-mail address lines up and matches.
You don't need to do anything else.
WordPress will automatically look for your e-mail address within the Gravatar service and it will begin
pulling in your profile photo.
All right so now you know how to associate an avatar with your user account.
Feel free to pause this lesson and go create a Gravatar account right now if you'd like to.
And now let's change gears and learn how to create new user accounts within WordPress.
Right.
Because maybe we want to invite a friend or a family member or a coworker to help us manage the Web
site.
Maybe we want multiple authors on the Web site.
It's super easy to set up.
So check this out.
Let's jump back to our admin dashboard and in the sidebar when we hover over the users option within
this pop out menu we see an item named add new.
So go ahead and click on Add new and then from this screen we just need to fill in a bit of info about
our colleague or friend or family member that we want to invite.
So first let's give them a user name.
In my case since I'm acting like my cat is the main administrator of the web site I will pretend that
my cat is inviting me to contribute.
So for the new username account I will say Brad then enter the new person's email address and you can
fill out these fields but they are not required.
Now when it comes to the password for this new account WordPress will generate a really long secure
password for us automatically.
If you want to see the passwords you can keep note of it.
Just go ahead and click the show password button.
Otherwise you can just make sure that this box is checked and then WordPress will send the new user
an email with an activation link they can click where they can immediately choose their own new password.
Now before we click this add new user button I want to bring your attention to this role field because
this is perhaps the most important thing on this screen.
So when I click on this field I can choose between five different options.
Subscriber contributor author editor and administrator.
Now in just a moment I will explain what each of these five options means in detail.
But before we jump into that I just want to say that this field is basically just asking you the question
How much do you trust this new person that you're inviting into your wordpress.
OK and then based on how much you trust that person or how much faith you want to place in that person
you choose a role level accordingly.
So now let's go through these options one by one.
I'm actually going to go through them in the opposite order that WordPress lists them because I think
this makes more sense.
So let's start with administrator.
What does that mean.
Well that's basically full access and control of literally everything within your Wordpress Web site.
That's the role that your current user admin account has right throughout this course.
You have been the administrator.
So you have full rights and privileges to change anything unless you really truly trust someone and
they have great technical skills.
I probably wouldn't grant them full administrator access.
OK let's move on to the editor role.
So an editor has permissions to create and edit any post so they can create their own posts.
They can edit and change other people's posts and they can fully publish the content up live on to the
Web site.
Next let's talk about the author role.
So an author can create and edit their own posts but they cannot edit any other posts that were created
by other people.
So an author has a little bit of independence.
They can create a draft for a post and then indeed they can also publish that post live up onto the
Web site but they're kind of locked into their own sandbox because they can't make changes to any other
author's posts.
Next let's talk about the contributor role a contributor can create a draft for a post but they can't
actually publish it live up onto the Web site for the whole world to view.
So the contributor role is a great option if you want someone to help write guest posts for your website.
They can sign in and create rough drafts for post but then it's up to an editor or an administrator
to review their post and finalize it or publish it.
Also once an editor or an administrator does indeed publish a contributor's post from that point forward
the contributor cannot make changes to it.
So the contributor just creates the rough draft and then once it gets published it's out of their hands.
At that point it's up to the administrators and the editors to make any future changes to the article
if necessary.
And finally let's talk about the subscriber role a subscriber can't really do anything.
They can't even create rough drafts for blog posts.
All the subscriber can do is sign in and change their first name last name and nickname that's it.
You might be wondering why the subscriber role even exists.
Well it's outside the scope of this course.
But when you get into more advanced things like e-commerce where if you try to create the next big social
network like Facebook there are plug ins that can help you create those sorts of things within Wordpress
and in those types of cases advanced plugin developers can do some pretty creative things with the subscriber
role but within the context of this course and what we are trying to achieve with user accounts we don't
have any real need for the subscriber role.
Now that weve gone over these five roles Let's get back to the task at hand.
So remember I'm pretending that my cat is creating a new user account for me and when it comes to the
role let's say that my cat says that I can be an editor.
All right.
And then I will click the Add New User button and now from this main user's screen here's the list of
all registered users and there are now two of them.
Now at the moment in this web browser I'm still logged in as kindo admin but just as an example why
don't I open up a new web browser and sign in as the Brad user.
So here's a new browser window where I'm not signed in as anyone.
We can tell that's the case because there's no black admin bar along the top.
However if I want to sign in with my new Bradd account all I need to do is go up into the address bar
and add on slash W.P. and then I can either visit dasht log in HP.
So that would successfully take me to a log in screen.
Or you can visit W.P. dash admen.
So I think either of those to the end of the route of your you are l will do the trick.
Both you or els will ask for the new username and password.
So remember my new user name is Brad.
And then behind the scenes let me type in my password and then click log in.
OK.
So here's the admin dashboard as viewed by my Bradd account.
And remember my new Bradd account is not an administrator it's an editor.
And remember of the 5 user roles aside from Administrator editor is the next most powerful.
So if we look at my left hand sidebar you can see that as an editor I can create new posts.
I can create new pages and if I click on posts I can even edit existing posts that were created by the
administrator.
The Katic count.
Now you might be wondering what are the limitations of an editor accountant.
Well you'll notice that in my sidebar I don't have a plugins option nor do I have a settings option
or an appearance option.
Those are things that only administrators have access to.
So that means as an editor I can't customize the look and feel of the Web site.
I can't change the design or the navigation menus but I can add new content.
So let's try that out right now.
Let's just create a new post really quick so I will click Add new and let's imagine.
I want to create a new blog post named chocolate cake for the content.
I will just say Loren if some chocolate cake recipe will be placed here shortly.
Check back soon.
And then if I scroll down in the right hand side bar and look under categories I will assign this post
into the recipes category and let's go ahead and publish this post.
Now if I check out the front facing portion of my website click on recipes.
Here we see the newest post is by Brad.
Here is my username and profile photo.
Chocolate cake.
Now if we look closely the author name uses a lower case b for bread.
So that means it's using my user name instead of my full name or nickname.
So practice makes perfect if we want to change the way this author named display is.
We can just go back into the admin dashboard in the sidebar click on profile instead of users.
It can be a bit confusing because administrators see the word users in the sidebar but editors authors
contributors and subscribers only see profile.
But anyways go ahead and click on profile and if we scroll down a bit you can enter in your first or
last name where your nickname.
So I will just change my nickname to Brad the chef and then under this display name publicly as field.
Change that to the nickname option.
Then scroll down to the very bottom of this page and click Update profile.
And then if I jump back to the front facing portion of the Web site and refresh perfect.
So now the author name reads Brad the chef and that's actually going to bring this lesson to a close.
I hope this lesson encouraged you to collaborate with other people to create better and better content
because even if you don't 100 percent trust someone you can always assign their user account the contributor
role and then you will have final say as the owner of the website before anything gets truly posted
onto your website for the entire world to view.
There is no real limit to how many different user accounts you create.
So feel free to invite and collaborate with as many people as you would like.
All right now changing gears in our next lesson we will learn about a few miscellaneous but very important
settings in wordpress that we can customize.
It should be an eye opening experience.
Let's keep things rolling and I will see you in the next lesson.